---
title: "Definitive Guide to the JaCoCo Gradle Plugin"
categories: [tools]
modified: 2018-10-05
last_modified_at: 2018-10-08
author: tom
tags: 
comments: true
ads: true
excerpt: "A tutorial on how to measure and enforce code 
          coverage on a Java code base with JaCoCo
          and Gradle."
sidebar:
  toc: true
---



As discussed in my article about [100% Code Coverage*](/100-percent-test-coverage/),
a code coverage tool should provide the means not only to measure code coverage, but also to enforce it.
This tutorial shows how to measure and enforce code coverage with JaCoCo and its Gradle plugin, but the concepts
are also valid for the JaCoCo Maven plugin. 

{% include github-project url="https://github.com/thombergs/code-examples/tree/master/tools/jacoco" %}

## Why JaCoCo?
[JaCoCo](https://www.jacoco.org/jacoco/) is currently the most actively maintained and sophisticated code coverage 
measurement tool for the Java ecosystem. 

There's also [Cobertura](http://cobertura.github.io/cobertura/), but at the time
of this writing, the latest commit is from 10 months ago and the build pipeline is failing ... signs that the project is
not actively maintained.

## How Does It Work?
JaCoCo measures code coverage by instrumenting the Java bytecode on-the-fly using a [Java Agent](https://www.jacoco.org/jacoco/trunk/doc/agent.html). 
This means that it modifies the class files to create hooks that count if a certain line of code or a certain branch 
have been executed during a test run. 

JaCoCo can be used standalone or integrated within a build tool. In this tutorial, we're using JaCoCo from within a Gradle build.

## Basic Gradle Setup
The basic setup is very straightforward. We simply have to apply the `jacoco` plugin within our `build.gradle`:

```groovy
apply plugin: 'jacoco'
``` 

In this tutorial, we're using JUnit 5 as our testing framework. With the current Gradle version, we still have to tell Gradle to use the new JUnit Platform for running tests:

```groovy
test {
  useJUnitPlatform()
}
```

## Creating a Binary Coverage Report

Let's run our Gradle build:

`./gradlew build`

JaCoCo now automatically creates a file
`build/jacoco/test.exec` which contains the coverage statistics in binary form.

The destination for this file can be configured in the `jacocoTestReports` closure in `build.gradle`
which is documented on the [JaCoCo Gradle Plugin](https://docs.gradle.org/current/userguide/jacoco_plugin.html)
site.

## Creating an HTML Coverage Report

Since the binary report is not readable for us, let's create an HTML report:

```
./gradlew build jacocoTestReport
```

When calling the `jacocoTestReport` task, JaCoCo by default reads the binary report, transforms it into a human-readable 
HTML version, and puts the result into `build/reports/jacoco/test/html/index.html`.

**Note that the `jacocoTestReport` task simply does nothing when the `test.exec` file does not exist.** So, we should always run the `build` or `test` task first. 

The following log output is an indicator that we forgot to run the `build` or `test` task:

```
> Task :tools:jacoco:jacocoTestReport SKIPPED`
```

We can let this task run automatically with every build by adding it as a finalizer for the build task in `build.gradle`: 

```groovy
test.finalizedBy jacocoTestReport
```

<div class="notice--success">
  <h4>Why put <code>jacocoTestReport</code> after <code>test</code>?</h4>
  The test report should be generated as soon as the tests have completed. If we 
  generate the report at a later time, for instance by using <code>build.finalizedBy jacocoTestReport</code>,
  other steps may fail in the meantime, stopping the build without having created the report.
  Thanks to <a href="https://disqus.com/by/alexander_burchak/">Alexander Burchak</a> for pointing this out
  in the comments.  
</div>

## Enforcing Code Coverage 

The JaCoCo Gradle Plugin allows us to define rules to enforce code coverage. **If any of the defined rules fails, the verification will fail**. 

We can execute the verification by calling:

```groovy
./gradlew build jacocoTestCoverageVerification
```

Note that by default, this task is not called by `./gradlew check`. To include it, we can add the following to our `build.gradle`:

```groovy
check.dependsOn jacocoTestCoverageVerification
```

Let's look at how to define verification rules.

### Global Coverage Rule
The following configuration will enforce that **100% of the lines are executed during tests:**

```groovy
jacocoTestCoverageVerification {
  violationRules {
    rule {
      limit {
        counter = 'LINE'
        value = 'COVEREDRATIO'
        minimum = 1.0
      }
    }
  }
}
```

Instead of enforcing line coverage, **we can also count other entities** and hold them against our coverage threshold:

* **LINE:** counts the number of lines
* **BRANCH:** counts the number of execution branches
* **CLASS:** counts the number of classes
* **INSTRUCTION:** counts the number of code instructions
* **METHOD:** counts the number of methods

Also, we can measure these other metrics, aside from the covered ratio:

* **COVEREDRATIO:** ratio of covered items to uncovered items (i.e. percentage of total items that are covered)
* **COVEREDCOUNT:** absolute number of covered items
* **MISSEDCOUNT:** absolute number of items not covered 
* **MISSEDRATIO:** ratio of items not covered 
* **TOTALCOUNT:** total number of items       

### Excluding Classes and Methods
Instead of defining a rule for the whole codebase, we can also define a local rule for just some classes.

**The following rule enforces 100% line coverage on all classes except the excluded ones**:

```groovy
jacocoTestCoverageVerification {
  violationRules {
    rule {
      element = 'CLASS'
        limit {
          counter = 'LINE'
          value = 'COVEREDRATIO'
          minimum = 1.0
      }
      excludes = [
        'io.reflectoring.coverage.part.PartlyCovered',
        'io.reflectoring.coverage.ignored.*',
        'io.reflectoring.coverage.part.NotCovered'
      ]
    }
  }
}
```

Excludes can either be defined on `CLASS` level like above, or on `METHOD` level.

If you want to exclude methods, you have to use their fully qualified signature in the excludes
like this:

```
io.reflectoring.coverage.part.PartlyCovered.partlyCovered(java.lang.String, boolean)
``` 

## Combining Rules

We can combine a global rule with more specific rules:

```groovy
violationRules {
    rule {
      element = 'CLASS'
      limit {
        counter = 'LINE'
        value = 'COVEREDRATIO'
        minimum = 1.0
      }
      excludes = [
          'io.reflectoring.coverage.part.PartlyCovered',
          'io.reflectoring.coverage.ignored.*',
          'io.reflectoring.coverage.part.NotCovered'
      ]
    }
    rule {
      element = 'CLASS'
      includes = [
          'io.reflectoring.coverage.part.PartlyCovered'
      ]
      limit {
        counter = 'LINE'
        value = 'COVEREDRATIO'
        minimum = 0.8
      }
    }
  }
```

The above enforces 100% line coverage except for a few classes and redefines the minimum coverage for the class
`io.reflectoring.coverage.part.PartlyCovered` to 80%.

**Note that if we want to define a lower threshold than the global threshold for a certain class, we have to exclude 
it from the global rule as we did above!** Otherwise the global rule will fail if that class does not reach 100% 
coverage.

## Excluding Classes from the HTML Report

The HTML report we created above still contains all classes, even though we have excluded some methods from our coverage rules. We might want to exclude the same classes and methods from the report that we have excluded from our rules.

Here's how we can exclude certain classes from the report:

```groovy
jacocoTestReport {
  afterEvaluate {
    classDirectories = files(classDirectories.files.collect {
      fileTree(dir: it, exclude: [
        'io/reflectoring/coverage/ignored/**',
        'io/reflectoring/coverage/part/**'
      ])
    })
  }
}
```

**However, this is a workaround at best**. We're excluding some classes from the classpath of the JaCoCo plugin 
so that these classes will not be instrumented at all. Also, we can only exclude classes and not methods.

Using a `@Generated` annotation as described in the next section is a much better solution.

## Excluding Classes and Methods From Rules and Reports

If we want to exclude certain classes and methods completely from JaCoCos coverage inspection
(i.e. from the rules *and* the coverage report), there is an easy method using a `@Generated` annotation.

**As of version 0.8.2 JaCoCo completely ignores classes and methods annotated with `@Generated`**. We can just create an
annotation called `Generated` and add it to all the methods and classes we want to exclude. They will be excluded from the report as well as from the rules we define.

At the time of this writing, the JaCoCo Gradle plugin still uses version 0.8.1, so I had to tell it to use the
new version in order to make this feature work:

```groovy
jacoco {
  toolVersion = "0.8.2"
}
```

## Excluding Code Generated By Lombok

A lot of projects use [Lombok](https://projectlombok.org/) to get rid of a lot of boilerplate code like getters, setters, or builders. 

Lombok reads certain annotations like `@Data` and `@Builder` and generates boilerplate methods based on them.
This means that the generated code will show up in JaCoCo's coverage reports and will be evaluated in the
rules we defined.

Luckily, JaCoCo honors Lombok's `@Generated` annotation by ignoring methods annotated with it. We simply have to 
tell Lombok to add this annotation **by creating a file `lombok.config`** in the main folder of our project with the
following content:

```
lombok.addLombokGeneratedAnnotation = true
```

## Missing Features
In my article about [100% Code Coverage](/100-percent-test-coverage/) I propose to always enforce 100% code coverage
while excluding certain classes and methods that don't need tests. To exclude those classes and methods from
both the rules and the report, the easiest way would be to annotate them with `@Generated`.

However, this can be a dangerous game. If someone just annotates everything with `@Generated`, we have 100% enforced code coverage but not a single line of code is actually covered!

Thus, **I would very much like to create a coverage report that does not honor the `@Generated` annotation in order to
know the real code coverage**.

Also, I would like to be able to use a custom annotation with a different name than `@Generated` to exclude classes
and methods, because our code is not really generated.

## Conclusion
This tutorial has shown the main features of the JaCoCo Gradle Plugin, allowing to measure and enforce 
code coverage.

You can have a look at the example code in my [github repository](https://github.com/thombergs/code-examples/tree/master/tools/jacoco).




