---
title: "The AWS Journey Part 5: Getting Warm with CDK"
categories: [craft]
date: 2021-07-13 06:00:00 +1000
modified: 2021-07-13 06:00:00 +1000
author: default
excerpt: ""
image:
  auto: 0061-cloud
---

## A Primer on CloudFormation

Before we talk about CDK, let's understand CloudFormation, because CDK is built on top of it. 

In a nutshell, CloudFormation is a tool that allows us to define the resources we want to deploy (subnets, loadbalancers, EC2 instances, security groups, [Docker images](/aws-cloudformation-deploy-docker-image/), ...) in a YAML or JSON file and manage their lifecycle. 

The resources defined in such a file are called a "stack", and the AWS CLI supports CloudFormation so that we can deploy, update, and delete stacks via CLI, which is great for integrating it into continuous deployment pipelines.

So, if we have all this power already, why do we need CDK?

## The Benefits of CDK

On a very basic level, CDK provides a programming interface to create and manage CloudFormation stacks. Everything we do in CDK will eventually become a CloudFormation stack.

But to create stacks, we're no longer bound to the YAML or JSON format.

**Instead, we can build the stacks with code**. This brings some perks:

* we can better package and distribute libraries of re-usable stacks,
* we can create unit tests to validate our stacks,
* we can better express dependencies between stacks,
* and probably some more that I'm not aware of, yet.

Additionally, CDK provides us with a CLI that has a higher abstraction level than the CloudFormation support in the AWS CLI, making it easier to manage stacks via command line.

In the rest of this article, we'll create and deploy a CDK stack from scratch and then have a look at some more advanced use cases.

## Getting Ready to Use CDK

Let's start with setting up the development environment.

### Installing the AWS CLI

First, we need to install the AWS CLI. Install it following the [official guide](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cli/latest/userguide/install-cliv2.html).

Then, run

```
aws configure
```

and enter your account information. This will set up the environment variables the CDK CLI will use to interact with the CloudFormation backend to interact with the stacks we manage with CDK.

### Installing the CDK CLI

Next, we need to install the CDK CLI. This is a Node app which we can install like this (presuming a functioning [Node](https://nodejs.org/en/) installation):

```
npm install -g aws-cdk 
```

Have a look at the [official docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/latest/guide/cli.html) for some info about the CDK CLI. We'll explain the most important command in the upcoming sections, though.

## CDK "Hello World"

With the prerequisites out of the way, let's create our first CDK app.

### Initializing a Java-based CDK Project

Like many frameworks these days, the CDK CLI provides a way to initialize a new project for us. We just have to run this command in an empty directory:

```
cdk init app --language java
``` 

This will create a Maven-based project with `src` and `test` folders and a `cdk.json` file.

We can now run 

```
cdk help
```

for a list of all the commands we can use to interact with out CDK project.

Since the CDK CLI calls the Maven project in the background you need to have Maven installed or you'll get an error like this:

```
/bin/sh: 1: mvn: not found
```

If you don't want to install Maven locally, you can easily [install the Maven Wrapper](/maven-wrapper/) in the CDK project. Make sure to tell CDK to use the Maven Wrapper by replacing `mvn` with `./mvnw` (or `./mvnw.cmd` when working on Windows) on this line in `cdk.json`:

```
  "app": "./mvnw -e -q compile exec:java",
```

### Exploring CDK Concepts

Let's have a look at the code that the `cdk init` has generated for us. 

The project has two classes: `CdkApp` and `CdkStack`.

`CdkApp` is the main class for the CDK project. It's called an "App":

```java
public class CdkApp {
    public static void main(final String[] args) {
        App app = new App();

        new CdkStack(app, "CdkStack");

        app.synth();
    }
}
```

The app class has a standard `main()` method that creates a new `App` instance and then adds some stacks to the app (in the initial state it just adds the `CdkStack`). Finally, it calls `app.synth()`.

The act of creating a CloudFormation stack from the CDK code is called "Synthesizing". CDK then sends this syntehsized CloudFormation stack to the CloudFormation backend to create or update stacks. 

The `CdkStack` class looks pretty empty as well in the beginning:

```java
public class CdkStack extends Stack {
    public CdkStack(final Construct scope, final String id) {
        this(scope, id, null);
    }

    public CdkStack(final Construct scope, final String id, final StackProps props) {
        super(scope, id, props);

        // The code that defines your stack goes here
    }
}
```

The stack is literally empty. We'll later add add some resources.

An important concept to know about is the concept of "constructs". Each "thing" that we create with CDK is a construct. The `CdkApp` and `CdkStack` objects are constructs. And the things we add to a stack are also constructs.

A construct can be a single resource like an S3 bucket, or it can be a complete stack of resource, like a whole VPC network with EC2 instances and security groups that make up a production environment. A construct can also be anything in between.

**The construct concept is what makes CDK so powerful over plain CloudFormation templates**. We can bundle constructs of any level into Maven or Gradle modules, publish them in the company's artifact repository (or even open source them) and use them throughout many projects. While this was possible with plain CloudFormation templates as well, it required more manual effort and scripting to do that.  

### Coding a Hello World Stack

Let's add some resources to our CDK app and play around with it to get a feel how CDK is working.

We'll start with a simple S3 bucket. For this, we need to add the library that provides the construct code for S3 to our `pom.xml`:

```xml
<dependency>
    <groupId>software.amazon.awscdk</groupId>
    <artifactId>s3</artifactId>
    <version>${cdk.version}</version>
</dependency>
```

In the `CdkStack` class, we add a `Bucket`:

```java
public class CdkStack extends Stack {
    public CdkStack(final Construct scope, final String id) {
        this(scope, id, null);
    }

    public CdkStack(final Construct scope, final String id, final StackProps props) {
        super(scope, id, props);

        Bucket bucket = Bucket.Builder.create(this, "bucket")
                .bucketName("reflectoring-test-bucket")
                .build();
        
    }
}
```

Each construct class in the Java CDK has a `Builder` that we use to instantiate construct objects. In our case, we only gave the bucket a name, which is enough to create a valid `Bucket` instance.

Note that we would have the same result using the `CfnBucket` class instead of the `Bucket` class:

```java
public class CdkStack extends Stack {
    ...

    public CdkStack(final Construct scope, final String id, final StackProps props) {
        super(scope, id, props);

        CfnBucket bucket = CfnBucket.Builder.create(this, "bucket")
            .bucketName("reflectoring-test-bucket")
            .build();
        
    }
}
```

**The classes prefixed with `Cfn` (for "CloudFormation") are called "Level 1 Constructs"**. They mirror the CloudFormation resources they represent on a low level. That means that the `CfnBucket` builder provides the exact properties to configure a bucket as the [`AWS::S3::Bucket` CloudFormation resource](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/AWSCloudFormation/latest/UserGuide/aws-properties-s3-bucket.html).

**Classes without the `Cfn` prefix are "Level 2 Construct" that provide some abstraction over the plain CloudFormation resources** (in this case, the `AWS::S3::Bucket` resource). Level 2 constructs aim to make it easier to configure the underlying resource. Some of the properties we can use in the builder stay the same (like the `bucketName` property), but others change to provide a higher-level abstraction.

You can read up about the different levels of constructs in the [AWS docs](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/cdk/latest/guide/constructs.html).

### Deploying the CDK Stack

### Updating the CDK Stack

### Destroying the CDK Stack

## Building a More Advanced CDK Stack: Jump Host 

### Passing Parameters Into a CDK Stack

* CloudFormation parameters are only resolved at deployment time...making it harder to predict the outcome
* static parameters at synthesis time are easier to understand and reason about

### Using Global Context Variables

* all stacks are synthesized even when you only deploy a single one
* this means the context parameters should always be present and be valid for all stacks

### Referencing Existing Resources

### Referencing Other CDK Resources

### Importing Outputs from Other Stacks

### Producing Outputs from a CDK Stack

### Managing Multiple Stacks

```
cdk destroy "*" 
```

### Debugging a CDK Stack

```
export MAVEN_OPTS="-Xdebug -Xrunjdwp:transport=dt_socket,server=y,suspend=y,address=5006"
```



